In society today it is hard to seperate people from their devices.  Devices have become intertwined in our world and thus technology companies must be extremely careful about the risks they expose their clients to in day to day activities.  I believe making technology companies responsible for protecting their client from harm helps to keep the company from pushing out their technology too soon. There are two major aspects that I believe technology companies should be held accountable.  The first is for physical safety and the second is protection from theft of identity, wealth, and the theft of concepts.

The first point is the idea of physical protection.  There have been many companies throughout history that were held responsible for the care of their workers because they had been exposed to chemicals or radiation causing them to become ill and die.  Historically the first company held responsible for the health of their employees was the Radium watch factories, whose employees got sick and died from the radium they were painting watches.  The radium girls had to fight and prove that they were dying from radium and not other diseases, but finally the company was held accountable and this led to the creation of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.  This company did not originally know that it was poisoning the girls, but they also were more concerned with generating wealth than admitting the crime.  More of this story can be found in the Marketplace Morning Report.  From this view the belief that a company should also be responsible for its clients is an easy connection, and yet there is evidence that this is not always happening. Latour cited in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy says, "As we interact with and through these artifacts, they affect the decisions that we make and how we make them."  Technology does more that just put the device in our hand, it  affects the person as a whole. We do not currently know the long term effects of cell phones, but early studies showed links to car phones and testicular cancer.  The American Cancer Society supports there are studies showing links to cancer, but none are definitive. The company did not know that would happen, but with prior knowledge of microwaves should there have been more caution in using them in devices the person carries all of the time. Even now companies encourage people to buy them even though there has been concern since 1999.

Along the lines of physical safety is mental health.  A disturbing trend has arisen as technology continues to grow in popularity.  There are several studies linking the increase in technology use by young adults and a decline in mental health.  With the presentation of a perfect life projected by people online in a staged and prepared image and post, others may fall into depression, and those posting can become narcissistic. At what point is a company culpable?  Companies like twitter and facebook use algorithms to help you see what you are viewing but what if that is more toxic and adding to the polarization of people's emotions and the divide in the country.  Similarly people have blamed movies and games for increased violence, but what if some of this is truly related to technology.  Is the technology dehumanizing people and making them think killing and suicide are okay?  Companies need to consider the effects of what they show and produce.  Television is another technology group that pushes the envelope and possibly should be held accountable because of shows like 13 Reasons Why, making suicide glamourous, or Cuties being linked to child pornography, and the list goes on.  At what point should society expect compensation for the mental damages of technology.

 Another issue is the security of a person's personal property, from identity to intellectual property.  With modern technology there is so much information that is readily available and it puts people more at risk with every application they choose to access.  Unfortunately there are many people in the world trying to steal and defraud others in order to get ahead.  Companies need to make sure their encryption and security is adequate to withstand the attack of hackers. There have been several breaches because of hackers that have compromised customer security, and in most of those situations the technology company provides an identity theft protection plan. Catherine Baker in her article Ethical technology and trust says, "Some companies are expanding the mission of existing ethics, learning, and inclusion to include ethical technology, while maintaining separate technology ethics programs. Doing so helps keep technology ethics top of mind across the organization and encourages executives to consider the distinctions between technology-related ethical issues and broader corporate and professional ethics concerns." This article also addresses the need of the company to protect the client in order to develop trust.  In the current society a breach in trust can destroy a company because they lose the following of their customers and those customers will buy from the competition. Another problem that companies have gotten in trouble for is stealing technology or ideas from customers and claiming it as their own.  Apple has been sued multiple times for using technology they have taken from other sources most recently reported by Bloomberg with respect to the Apple watch.  There are stories all the time about big companies taking ideas and tech from someone who is unknown and claiming it as their own.  The consequences caused years of legal battles.  This and so many other aspects are to be considered when thinking about the responsibility of a technology company.

In general, Technology companies need to be held accountable for the wellbeing of their clients.  It should be an idea that is always in mind and considered in every decision, because a mis-step can cause harmful consequences to another person.  Too often today there is evidence of the harm caused because of the misrepresentation of life in social media, the television industry pushing the limits of content and promoting suicide and child pornography, and thus causing disturbing trends in mental health.  There are so many more consequences that should be considered before the bottom line, but if the bottom line is all a company is worried about then holding them accountable will hit them where it hurts when a client is injured or loses assets from a leak or breach in security.  Humanity should always trump money and success, but sometimes the law is required to keep the order correct.